School principals and members of school governing bodies (SGBs) who use norms and standards to benefit themselves rather than improving the standard of learning and teaching in schools should be warned that corruption watch is focusing on such people and relevant measures will be taken against anyone found guilty of misusing school funds.
Education MEC Ishmael Kgetjepe issued a stern warning in this regard when addressing the official launch of the 2018 SGB elections at Hoër Tegniese Skool Tom Naudé on Monday. He said the department would not allow a situation where members of SGBs help themselves to school funds, rendering schools ungovernable and dysfunctional. It remains uncontested that SGBs play a crucial role in the functionality and success of schools, he explained.
Education MEC Ishmael Kgetjepe signs the pledge.
The gathering was observed under the theme ‘Support quality education for your child’ and attracted educators, chairpersons of the current SGBs, education experts and various education unions. Kgetjepe stated that the term of office of the current SGBs in public schools ended yesterday (Wednesday) and the elections for new SGBs are expected to take place from 1 to 31 March. The term in office is three years and elections were last held in 2015.
“We exist as the Department of Education to deliver curriculum in all our schools aimed at equipping children with requisite knowledge, skills and attitude that will help them reach their full potential. It is critical that these aspects be analysed and understood to mean exactly that and our SGBs across the province must always function and discharge their roles and responsibilities within this framework. When given these responsibilities, let us govern with dignity and pride. The importance of education and being educated has increased over the years,” he stated.
Kgetjepe emphasised the importance of the elections as a critical milestone for the sector in deepening democracy and openness in public schools and society as a whole and encouraged active and wise participation. He said this was a chance for parents and members of community to make a difference in the education of their children. He further called on the incoming SGBs to familiarise themselves with education issues and the South African Schools Act in order to develop the necessary capacity to resolve the many governance challenged in schools.
The department shall, as part and parcel of capacity building, provide introductory training for newly elected governing bodies to enable them to perform their functions, he explained, adding that they will further ensure that principals and other officers of the department render all the necessary assistance to governing bodies in the performance of their functions. After Kgetjepe’s address, education unions representative were called to the stage to sign a pledge undertaking that the elections would be free and fair.
Story & photos: ENDY SENYATSI
>>endy@observer.co.za
Education experts from across the province in attendance of the official launch of the 2018 SGB election season.