Premier Stan Mathabatha has issued a harsh warning to accounting officers in government departments and municipalities who fail to improve their audit opinions saying anyone who gets a disclaimer will be disclaimed from government.
He was responding to the State of the Province Address (Sopa) debate in the Legislative Chamber last Thursday. In his written response Mathabatha said no one should remain comfortable drawing big salaries from people’s taxes while doing nothing to change the lives of the people for the better. He indicated that when he took office in 2013, one of Executive Council’s immediate tasks was to do away with the disclaimer audit opinions.
“Irregular and unauthorised expenditure, let alone disclaimer audit opinions, were almost synonymous with the provincial administration back then, but there is no doubt that the current administration has turned the situation around,” he said. Mathabatha further said the fact that there was no disclaimer audit opinion should be appreciated.
“We are working closely with the leadership of our municipalities and the Auditor-General to ensure that we eliminate disclaimers from our municipalities. Accounting officers in the provincial administration were told in no uncertain terms that anyone who gets a disclaimer would be disclaimed from government. This is exactly the same message which should go to accounting officers in our municipalities,” he stated
Mathabatha acknowledged that the pace at which the Provincial Government has been moving in the recent past leaves much to be desired, adding that Limpopo cannot afford to return even a cent to National Treasury whereas there are people who are still without a roof over their heads.
When responding to issues of economic growth, he said the memorandums of understanding (MoU) the Provincial Government continues to sign in different countries are by no means a mere cosmetic exercise. A partnership agreement signed between the South Africa’s Women Investment Holdings and the Jidong Development Group and China Africa Development Fund for a R1,65 billion investment into cement manufacturing is flourishing in Thabazimbi, he emphasised, adding that R147 million was set aside to support the roll-out of basic infrastructure in the Musina-Makhado Special Economic Zone.
Mathabatha said the current administration will continue to press hard against public servants who steal from the people and reiterated that dozens of traffic officials were arrested in various parts of the province for crime related offenses. He concluded by saying operations meant to deal with corrupt traffic officials will be continuing throughout the year to eliminate corruption in the licensing facilities.
Story: ENDY SENYATSI
>>endy@observer.co.za