With the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) having given prospective voters the opportunity to register for and verify their details ahead of next year’s elections this past weekend, Polokwane was a hive of party activity with several big political guns descending on the city. African National Congress (ANC) Deputy Secretary General Jessie Duarte made it to Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) Commander-in-Chief Julius Malema’s home turf, where both respectively met with supporters. At the IEC registration station at Mponelege Primary School Duarte encouraged residents of Seshego, with a focus on the youth, to go and register to vote. The moment she had departed Malema arrived at the school grounds with a similar message to his supporters. He called on them to turn out in their numbers and said he wanted the turn-out in the 2019 elections to be bigger than that of 1994.
The registration weekend in Polokwane was not without incidents, although minor. During a visit to the station at Hoër Tegniese Skool Tom Naudé Polokwane Observer was informed by presiding officer Fumani Mathonsi mid-Saturday morning of an incident an hour prior during which a young man causing a racket while on the phone in the hall was threatened with arrest if he persisted with his behaviour. Referring to the youngster calling him names, Mathonsi said the prospective voter had left after being prevented from tearing up his registration document.
At Good Hope Primary School in Westenburg, matters were running smoothly and a steady trickle of voters were arriving to register. Outside, positioned across the road, the only political party visible was the ANC where members were encouraging ANC voters to also register with them.
In a breakdown of events in other areas, IEC provincial spokesperson Chris Ramafalo indicated that all 34 affected stations in the Vuwani area had opened, while five stations didn’t have any activity save for 29 registered voters showing up.
He said that one of the stations in the Tzaneen area had opened on time but that the community threatened to close the station and also burn it in the evening, Police intervened and resolved the problem.
“In Ward 9 in Molemole the induna informed people from Ward 7 to register in Ward 9 because they were complaining that the councillor was not providing services to Ward 7 and this was going to affect the commission as voters were going registered in the ward, following the intervention from the Provincial Electoral Officer, South African Police Services and community in the affected ward the matter was resolved.”
He concluded referring to a soccer tournament taking place on the grounds where the IEC’s tent was pitched in Ward 25 at Tafelkop, which apparently almost led to a disruption of the registration process but the tent was moved off the pitch for IEC representatives to work and the tournament continuing.
Story: Editorial team
Thokozile Xasa, and Jessie Duarte, Deputy Secretary General of the ANC are surrounded by party supporters during the voters’ registration campaign at Mponegele Primary School in Seshego on Saturday.
Presiding officer at the registration station at Hoër Tegniese Skool Tom Naudé, Fumani Mathonsi assists prospective first-time voter, 19-year-old Dylan Fox to register on Saturday morning. Fox said he was excited about the prospect of being able to vote in next year’s elections.
Adelaide Anderson registers to vote as she has spent several years living in Botswana but returned to South Africa recently. Assisting her is MMM Sekhaolelo, registration official at the registration station in Westenburg.
IEC Registration Supervisor Moloko Letshokgohla welcomes residents at the registration centre at Laerskool Pietersburg-Oos.
Mina Legodi and Lethabo Raphahla from Seshego’s Zone 1 joined the masses that went to Mponegele Primary School to verify their registration details.
The only political party visible across the road at the Westenburg registration station is the ANC. Percy Tantsi, Japie Sehlapelo and Comrade Mmatlala encourage ANC members to register to vote.
Political party representatives Matseleng Lekganyane and Riamalamula Mashudu of the African National Congress (ANC) and Ruth Mamaregane of the Democratic Alliance (DA) monitor the registration process at Laerskool Pietersburg-Oos.
Elizabeth Botopela, resident in Seshego’s Zone 1 on her way to the registration station at Mponegele Primary School to verify her details.
Wilna and Johann Liebenberg arrive at the registration centre at Laerskool Pietersburg-Oos to verify their details.
Harry Mamabolo, IEC electoral officer at the registration station in Westenburg, says everything is running smoothly with a steady trickle of people arriving to register on Saturday.