Introducing the New Jaguar E-PACE; For staunch Jaguar enthusiasts who want to stand out from the crowd, seek more passion, excitement and spontaneity in their lives, or just want to live life with a little more roar. Jaguar’s first compact SUV was revealed to residents of Polokwane this past Saturday at Jaguar Polokwane. Prospective buyers were taken on test drives by sales executives who did not flinch when asked to take the E-PACE off the beaten track and explore the rough terrain behind Jaguar Polokwane’s state-of-the-art facility at Baobab Gardens near Thornhill Shopping Centre.
It is the new “Cub” on the block that catches the eye with its sports car inspired design. Yet it will have the practicality of an SUV, achieving best in class, small item stowage and load space access.
Jaguar admirers, Roelf Landman and Eva Jans were impressed by the new E-PACE’s sculptured bonnet and muscular rear haunches, as well as the sleek LED headlights and signature LED taillights.
Wherever you need to go, whatever you need to take, the E-PACE is designed to carry you and your cargo effortlessly and in style. The 1,234 litres of loadspace and towing capacity of 1,800kg impressed Landman in particular. With a host of clever features designed for your convenience, Jaguar’s newest cub proves sensible doesn’t have to be boring.
The compact SUV’s interior is distinctly Jaguar. Every component in the cockpit is meticulously designed and wraps around the driver to ensure a defined, tactile driving experience.
Jaguar’s world renowned performance Ingenium engines are available for the new E-PACE and the range includes two petrol and three diesel derivatives. The economical 2,0 litre four cylinder 110 kW engine on the entry models should be very popular. While the turbocharged diesel engine offers a stunning consumption of only 5,61 litres per 100 km. The 2,0 litre four cylinder 221 kW turbocharged petrol engine can reach a top speed of 243 km per hour with 0 to 100 km per hour acceleration in 6,4 seconds.
If you want to experience real driving exhilaration, pay a visit to Jaguar Polokwane at 1 Buffalo Thorn Street, Baobab Gardens or call one of the dealership’s sales executives on 015 590 2900 to book your test drive. Experience the art of performance in a world full of dull, predictable, ‘me-too’ options.
Story: BARRY VILJOEN
>>barryv.observer@gmail.com
Prospective buyers Jacqueline, Hamilton and Jessica Phashe admire Jaguar’s new sports utility vehicle.
Eva Jans and Roelf Landman, owner of Loolness Design and Marketing Agency, took the new Jaguar E-PACE for a test drive on rough terrain.