With a march to the offices of the Premier and the Hawks in Polokwane on Friday, a roaring mass of Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) in Limpopo drew attention to earlier charges of alleged corruption brought against two MECs, the former acting Chief Finance Officer (CFO) of the Department of Health and an ex-employee of the Department of Education.
In midday heat the fighters dropped off memoranda to both institutions after noon. From the Hawks the party’s provincial leadership demanded the immediate arrest of Social Development MEC Mapula Mokaba-Phukwana, Transport and Rural Safety MEC Makoma Makhurupetje, former acting Health Department CFO Justice Mudau and former Education Department official Thabo Mabotja and from Premier Stan Mathabatha, the immediate dismissal of the two MECs and Mudau. The charges pertain to alleged irregularities with regards to tenders and Mabotja’s then appointment being questioned.
In the memorandum to the Hawks the EFF referred to no arrest having been made in any of the cases. “When we lodged these cases with them we thought that they would do the right thing as law enforcement agency to arrest those who are involved in corruption.
“We have now come to a conclusion that (its) either the purse of the poor people of Limpopo is being undermined or not being taken seriously. The failure to act by the Hawks give(s) us (un)reasonable doubt that they might be in the pocket of politicians.”
In the memorandum to the Premier the EFF stressed that Mathabatha was fully aware of criminal and corrupt activities in his department but doing nothing to stop it. “The Premier must be seen acting against corruption, not blowing hot air on it. The failure by the Premier can only suggest that he is part of this corruption. His silence on the injustice committed to the poor people of Limpopo is tantamount to betrayal. He must take cue from his counterparts and heed (to) the call of the South African president of fighting corruption wherever it exists.”
On Tuesday EFF Provincial Secretary Jossey Buthane indicated that both the Premier and the Hawks in Limpopo had been given seven days to respond and that they would wait to see what unfolded.
Story & photos: YOLANDE NEL
>>observer.yolande@gmail.com
A singing EFF supporter.
A man captures visuals on a cellphone as EFF Provincial Secretary Jossey Buthane addresses the crowd from the back of a vehicle parked in front of the Premier’s Office.
A man in a wheelchair meets a Police combat vehicle, ahead of the procession of EFF marchers through the city centre and up Hans van Rensburg Street, as it makes its way to the Premier’s Office.
Blowing the whistle outside Mowaneng as a Policeman looks on.
A member of the Police’s Red Berets keeps an eye on an EFF marcher displaying a placard with a warning to Premier Stan Mathabatha to stop protecting and promoting corruption.