A deputation from the United States (US) Embassy in Pretoria, led by Assistant Cultural Affairs Officer, Nicholas von Mertens, visited Limpopo on recently to enlighten students of the University of Limpopo and the University of Venda on the Fulbright Foreign Student Program which offers opportunities to South African post graduate students to study at US universities.
Von Mertens hosted an information sharing session over dinner for Fulbright alumni and representatives of UL at a restaurant in the city to provide information about the program. Von Mertens explained that this world-renowned program offers scholarships that cover up to the full cost of tuition and living expenses in the US for South African students interested in pursuing a Master’s or Doctoral degree at any accredited institution in the US.
According to Von Mertens, applications for the 2019-2020 Fulbright Foreign Student Program are awaited until 22 April, and applicants are encouraged to start the application process as soon as possible. ”Highly-motivated South African students wishing to pursue a Master’s degree must have completed a four-year B-Tech degree or a three-year Bachelor’s degree with an Honours degree. Prospective Doctoral students must have successfully obtained a Master’s degree,” Von Mertens explained.
“The Fulbright Program is the U.S. Government’s flagship international educational exchange program.  It was established in 1946 to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and other countries. It currently operates in South Africa and more than 150 countries worldwide. To date, more than 2 000 South Africans have received Fulbright scholarships to pursue degrees in the United States. South African Fulbright alumni come from diverse backgrounds, and include Professor Es’kia Mphahlele, Dr. Yvonne Muthien, Dr. Sibusiso Sibisi and Judge Mandisa Maya,” Von Mertens elaborated.
Fulbright Program alumni from Limpopo who joined the session, Susan Dippenaar, Mashaba Mashala and Thabe Masebatlela were ad idem that the opportunity to be part of the program, changed their lives for the better. “It was a fantastic experience and it opened a new world to me,” said Masebatlela, who is currently a Professor in Biochemistry at UL. He obtained a PhD in Biological Sciences from the Clemson University in South Carolina in the US in 2009 and grew up in Bolobedu. Mashela obtained her Master’s degree in Teaching from the Iowa State University in 2009. She hails from Ga-Matlala and works at the Centre for Academic Excellence at UL.
Dippenaar is a professor at UL and followed a non-degree program at the Brigham Young University in Utah during 2001 and 2002 in pursuance of a PhD at UL.
South African students interested in applying for the Fulbright Program can learn more by visiting the U.S. Embassy website: https://za.usembassy.gov/fulbright.
Story & photo: BARRY VILJOEN
>>barryv.observer@gmail.com