Battle lines are drawn as the big guns are gathering for a provincial elective conference of the African National Congress (ANC) that is expected to see a collective of tried and tested party leaders vying for top positions in April.
Already Tuesday’s reshuffle of the national Cabinet allayed rumours of former ANC Provincial Chairperson Cassel Mathale returning to contest current ANC Provincial Chairperson Stan Mathabatha when delegates of the organisation meet for a conference scheduled for mid-April. President Cyril Ramaphosa’s much anticipated Cabinet changes slotted Mathale into the position of Deputy Minister of Small Business Development.
Current dynamics in the ruling party arena indicate two opposing forces that may lead the battle for the top five positions to take the party’s provincial structure into its next term. Whereas it initially seemed as if Mathabatha could have gone unopposed, he is now being contested by a political powerhouse to be reckoned with.
Most recently supporters of ANC PEC member Joe Mathebula, who was called on to contest the position of provincial chairperson, have assumed position on the battle field with a preferred line-up of equally prominent provincial players.
It was learnt that discussions with hopefuls in the particular line-ups are ongoing, but until the final cross gets drawn on a ballot paper or unless compromises are reached, things could go either way. From past occurrences, with the national elective conference being the most recent example, it is evident that matters can take a drastic turn at the eleventh hour as preferential expectations do not get met.
The line-up apparently projected by Mathebula’s fan base includes ANC Provincial Treasurer Danny Msiza for Deputy Provincial Chairperson, ANC Deputy Provincial Secretary Makoma Makhurupetje for Provincial Secretary, Legislature Deputy Speaker Lehlogonolo Masoga for Deputy Provincial Secretary and Makhado Mayor Florence Radzilani for Provincial Treasurer.
The general reflection among cadres in favour of the Mathebula package is that it should work under normal circumstances. Party sources alluded to the fact that Mathebula’s standing in politics and prominence in the business sphere, party support both at provincial and national levels and the united force formed with Msiza all enhanced his chances to secure the position.
The sources were not in favour of a Mathabatha return. They projected his drawback to be elected for another term to be manifesting in a lack of display of commitment and inability to successfully drive the party in Limpopo and provincial administration alike. The fact that Limpopo was seemingly not being taken seriously anymore where political contribution and projection at national and international level were concerned could count against Mathabatha, a source stressed.
As far as could be established the Mathabatha line-up could include the likes of ANC Deputy Provincial Chairperson Jerry Ndou, ANC PEC members Seaparo Sekoati and Soviet Lekganyane and ANC Provincial Working Committee (PWC) member Thabo Mokone. Apparently the Mathabatha camp was still attempting to sway Makhurupetje in their favour.
It was pointed out that the names of ANC Provincial Secretary Nocks Seabi and that of ANC PEC member Dan Sebabi, who was mentioned as hopeful earlier on, do not feature in any of the two proposed line-ups. Sources were adamant that the only guarantee anyone had was that the contest for provincial leadership was predicted to be fierce, as the big guns lined up for a battle that could result in blood being spilt.
Story: YOLANDE NEL
>>observer.yolande@gmail.com
Stan Mathabatha.
Thabo Mokone and Seaparo Sekoati.
Joe Mathebula.
Jerry Ndou.
Soviet Lekganyane.