Cycling enthusiasts can look forward to a challenging first-ever Tour de Limpopo stage race to be hosted from Polokwane to Tzaneen and back on 22 to 26 April.
It is the first international road cycling stage race to be hosted in Limpopo and the fully catered event will consist of two races, one being an International Cycling Union (UCI) AfricaTour 2,2 stage race for professional teams.
Covering a total distance of 427,6 km with 6 896 m elevation gain, the Tour de Limpopo is certainly going to place the riders in the hurt box. There are some big climbs during the stages, particularly the climb over Magoebaskloof which has a 4,9% incline over a distance of 8 km and is classed as a category 2 climb. Participants will have to endure the climb twice during the four days.
Mylene Paynter of Cycling South Africa (CSA) Public Relations and Communications office indicated in a press statement that racing in a province with an incredible landscape, vistas and hills that seem almost made for cycling is not the only reason to host a brand-new event like the inaugural Tour de Limpopo. The event which is ratified by the UCI as a 2,2 stage race and part of the UCI AfricaTour speaks volumes for the calibre of the race.
“The Tour de Limpopo will work to create a legacy programme for cycling in the province as well as engage the SMMEs in the region to become suppliers to the event, while also exploring the rich cultural diversity that exists. With the tremendous support and partnership from Limpopo Tourism Agency (LTA) there is no reason why the Tour de Limpopo can’t become the go-to event on the continent in time to come,” Paynter said, adding that CSA has identified the need to grow the elite participation of road cycling and require events in all provinces, while also introducing cycling to and encouraging the participation of the youth.
“The importance of a tour like this in South Africa provides our local elite teams with strong competition against compatriots and teams from abroad, while offering the opportunity to earn UCI points without the travel factor of racing in Europe. UCI points go a long way in improving our position in the UCI Nations Ranking, which in turn determines the number of slots that we can fill for team selections at world championships and big events like the Olympic Games,” CSA General Manager Mike Bradley indicated.
He added that elite teams consist of the top five teams from South Africa with invitations extended as far afield as the Southern African Development Community (SADC) regions in Africa, United Arab Emirates and also Taiwan.
The tour is fully catered for elites regarding accommodation and meals for all riders and support staff at no cost to the teams. Teams will compete for General Classification, Sprinters jersey, King of the Mountain jersey, Best Young Rider and Most Aggressive Rider as well as Overall Team Classification.
“Hosting an event like Tour de Limpopo is critical to the development of our sport and can act as a catalyst to inspire the youth to be part of this event one day, leaving a lasting legacy with the youth from Limpopo, inspired to be cyclists and be part of the future of the event,” Bradley concluded.
Story: RC Myburgh
>>rc.observer@gmail.com
For more information visit www.tourdelimpopo.co.za.