The first cyclists to complete the fourth stage of the inaugural Tour de Limpopo are expected to enter the finishing shoot at the old Peter Mokaba Stadium at about 11:30 this morning (Thursday).
This after cyclists started the final stage of the first ever Tour de Limpopo in Tzaneen earlier today.
Approximately 18 teams of professional cyclists from as far as Belgium, Cape Britain, Uganda, Serbia, Mauritius and Zambia as well as local teams lined up at the starting point on Monday morning in Polokwane after they and the media were welcomed by Limpopo Tourism Agency (LTA) Chief Executive Officer Sonto Ndlovu and Limpopo Economic Development, Environment and Tourism (Ledet) MEC Seaparo Sekoati on Sunday evening.
The start saw big cycling names ready to battle it out for general classification, sprinter’s jersey, king of the mountain, best young rider and most aggressive rider as well as overall team classification in the first ever Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) 2.2 four-stage race.
After Monday’s first stage which finished in Tzaneen, Gustav Basson of the ProTouch Sports South African team claimed victory in the open category. Due to points accumulated during the stage, 2018 Commonwealth Games bronze medalist Clint Hendricks (Team BCX from South Africa) donned the yellow jersey and held the top spot in the general classification going into stage two on Tuesday.
ProTouch Sports Team Manager Tony Harding said: “We’re really grateful for Cycling South Africa to put this event on, we really need more events like this in Africa, but more so in southern Africa. It’s great for us. All went according to plan, although there are still some areas for us to tweak here and there but overall, we are very happy with the results. We’re very proud of the way that the guys are riding.”
The results after the first stage include Basson as first in the open category in a time of 2:12.51, Hendricks in second place and Calvin Julius third.
Hendricks also claimed the yellow jersey after finishing first in the general classification with James Fourie also from ProTouch Sports being announced as king of the mountain of the first stage. Hendricks and Basson also took first and second place respectively in the sprinting category. Competing as u.23 rider Basson was also announced best young rider while Fourie was pointed out as most aggressive rider.
Final results will be published in next week’s edition of Polokwane Observer.
RC Myburgh
>>rc.observer@gmail.com
Andrew Dipela, LTA Board Chairperson, Onicca Moloi, Sport, Arts and Culture MEC, Seaparo Sekoati, Ledet MEC and Yster Zatasi, Cycling South Africa Vice President.
Cyclists start the inaugural Tour de Limpopo.