The rights group Section27 foresees appealing sections of a decision by the Limpopo High Court on Monday to dismiss the claim for special and constitutional damages brought before it by the family of Michael Komape, the learner who drowned in a pit toilet at his school in Chebeng in 2014 when he was only five years old.
Section27 indicated in a statement that they note with mixed reaction the judgement handed down by Judge Gerrit Muller and added that they were still studying the judgement. The institution went on to say they have taken further instruction from the Komape family in respect of the decision and anticipate that they will be appealing the damages aspect of the judgement in the Supreme Court of Appeal.
According to a document made available to Polokwane Observer, Muller ruled that the claim for future medical treatment in respect of Michael’s siblings, Maria and Onica succeeds and ordered the Department of Basic Education and Limpopo Department of Education as first and second defendants to pay R6 000 to each of the girls.
Muller further ordered the two departments to supply and install at each rural school currently equipped with pit latrines in the province, a sufficient number of toilets for the use of children which are easily accessible, secure and safe. It was learnt that the toilets should provide privacy and promote health and hygiene based on an assessment of the most suitable safe and hygienic sanitation technology.
The two departments are given until 30 July 2018 to deliver detailed reports to the court clearly highlighting how they are planning to execute on the ruling.
The statement by Section 27 further read: “While we welcome the structural interdict to provide adequate and safe sanitation for learners in Limpopo, we are at the same time extremely disappointed that the suffering of the Komape family and the circumstances of Michael‘s death has been insufficiently recognised and acknowledged.”
It further stressed that it was in their view a missed opportunity for developing the law in respect of constitutional damages. “The failure to award damages in this case stands in contrast to damages awarded by retired Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke to the families of the Life Esidimeni victims for the callous treatment of the victims in that case,” the statement read.
Story: ENDY SENYATSI
>>endy@observer.co.za