Three young beauties from the Limpopo Beauty Modelling Academy (LBMA) stable walked away with arms full of sashes won at the Miss Elite SA Pageant 2018 in Klerksdorp recently.
Moshibudi Manyaka (12), Tshepiso Mphidi (15) and Tshifhiwa Mammburu (23) won loads of prizes and titles, each in their own age categories.
Moshibudi, who is a learner at Mitchell House became interested in modelling in 2014 and started modelling at LBMA the next year. She won public choice awards in the category 11 to 12 years for the months of September, October, November and December of last year, and January, February and March of this year. She also won the Overall Public Choice Award and was second runner up in the People’s Choice Award as well as being named Best Dressed. She was the Limpopo winner in her category and finished in the Top 10 in South Africa.
She is a dedicated student and also does swimming and drum majorettes as well as belonging to the Nature Club at her school. “I would like to go all the way as far as beauty pageants are concerned, right up to Miss Universe because I want to explore the world and experience new things,” she told Polokwane Observer during an exclusive interview with the three young women late last week.
Her advice to other children her age is that education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world, in the late Nelson Mandela’s words. “You too can change the world,” she encouraged.
Tshepiso is a Grade 11 learner at Northern Academy who started modelling in 2014 and joined LBMA just last year. She was motivated to do modelling through watching American reality series ‘Toddlers and Tiaras’.
She won public choice awards in the category 13 to 15 years for the months of October and December last year as well as January, February and March this year. She also won the title Lady of Class.
She is an academic achiever and received a distinction for Life Orientation last year. Tshepiso does a lot of running to stay fit and healthy. She loves poetry and is an aspirant author of fairy tales and motivational works, who is looking for a publisher. “My motto in life, and advice to others is simple: Let love lead,” she said.
Tshifhiwa has just finished her diploma in Human Resources Management through MSC Business College in Polokwane. She attended Mopane Intermediate School in the Makhado area and was encouraged by friends in 2009 to enter the Miss Mopane Intermediate Pageant, which she won. She started modelling at LBMA this year and said she certainly did not expect to win anything so soon. Tshifhiwa was in the Top 5 Public Choice for January, February and March as well as the Public Choice Top 5 overall winner. She was the Miss Elite SA 2018 Provincial Winner in Limpopo and finished in the Top 10 of the Miss Elite SA Pro in her category 19 years plus. She also won the Director’s Choice Award.
She had a rural upbringing in Ramahantsha Village near Louis Trichardt and has a passion for encouraging young girls from rural areas to reach for their dreams no matter how impossible they seem. “I believe that everybody is somebody because of other people and only the sky is the limit,” she said. She loves singing worship songs and belongs to her church choir.
“Limitations only live in our minds but if we use our imaginations the possibilities can become limitless and with God, they can become reality,” she added.
Katryn Celliers, owner of LBMA said she is very proud of the three young women who worked tirelessly to shine at the beauty pageant.
All three models thanked Celliers for her dedication towards ensuring their success.
Story and photo: KAREN VENTER
>>karen@observer.co.za