Seshego Stadium will be a hive of activity when it hosts the 2017/18 MultiChoice Diski Challenge (MDC) fixtures involving reserve teams from Premier Soccer League (PSL) giants Mamelodi Sundowns Football Club, Kaizer Chiefs Football Club, Baroka Football Club and Polo­kwane City Football Club on 28 January.
It will be the first time the stadium hosts a major sporting event after upgrades to the tune of R9,7 m were completed last year.
The renovations included the installation of an irrigation system, drainage system, lighting, a parameter fence and turnstiles.
Director Community Development at Polokwane Municipality, Ndavhe Ramakuela said they were pleased to host the MultiChoice Diski Challenge and he was optimistic that the challenge would attract a myriad of football loving fans from all parts of the province. “We are done with the upgrades. We have also upgraded the dressing rooms. We have also numbered pavilion seats to ensure total holding capacity and we are looking forward to a great soccer spectacle,” Ramakuela said.
He also added that the stadium is now developed to national standards that would allow it to host national and international events. “We will also be able to host night events,” stressed Ramakuela.
The MDC is a three-year partnership with the PSL and focuses on building the PSL’s Reserve League in order to fast track u.23 players into the first teams of participating clubs.
Teams are allowed to field a maximum of three players over the age of 23 in their starting XI.
The new format is a 16-team league with each club playing every other club once. The club with the most points (that is, the team at the top of the log table) at the end of the tournament’s match day 15 will become the champions of MultiChoice Diski Challenge.
Seshego born head coach of Polo­kwane City Football Club Reserve team, Bayano Moloto said he was excited at the prospect of leading his team in his home town. “I used to play matches at Seshego Stadium when I was a defender at Ria Stars many moons ago and now I will be coaching a team at the stadium. That will obviously evoke a lot of memories and I am looking forward to a victory against Kaizer Chiefs’.
Fixtures
Baroka Football Club Reserves vs Mamelodi Sundowns Football Club Reserves – 10:00
Polokwane City Football Club Reserves vs Kaizer Chiefs Football Club Reserves – 12:00
Story: Herbert Rachuene
>>herbert.observer@gmail.com