Celebrations were the order of the day when the Moletjie royal house ‘Moshate’ held a ceremony named ‘Lunch for best performing matrics with his Majesty Kgosi Kgabo Moloto III’ at Moletjie Hall on Saturday where the top learners from schools in the area received awards for their hard work.
Moletjie’s top three learners, Jan Motimele from Mamolemane Secondary School, Moses Malebana from Sekuruwe Combined School and Sharon Mokgohloa from JH Moloto Se­condary School each attained seven distinc­tions to take the top three spots in that order.
Although Capricorn district did not do well as it dropped from its performance of 66,7% in 2015 to 60,9% in 2016 and again in 2017 as the district registered a disappointing per­form­ance of 59,7% pass rate, district director Kgabo Mo­­themane stated that Moletjie per­formed better and reiterated that the district is aiming for a better pass rate this year.
He said the benchmark is 95% and added that a certain financial institution gave the province’s second best performing learner Daniel Swarts from Pietersburg Hoërskool R40 000 and urged the class of 2018 to use this gesture a motivation.
A local motivational speaker and author, Fredrick Mamabolo took to the podium and spoke about ‘friendly fire’ urging learners to be responsible at institutions of higher learning. He said life gives people a certain period to work on themselves and one should use that chance wisely.
Kgosi Moloto congratulated all the learners and pledged to host a bigger celebration in four years’ time to honour students who completed their degrees. “Learners should go to war and make sure that they come home with degrees. We are happy with the results and we are going to visit all the schools in Moletjie more often and support them where possible for the community to produce best matric results. I am certain that a learner from Moletjie will be among the top performing learners in the country at the end of the 2018 academic year,” he stated.
The crowd was entertained by Pedi traditional dance group ‘Dinaka tsa Mauba’ who is also the Moletjie champions having won a R20 000 cash prize for claiming the first position during Moletjie Day traditional dance groups competition held at the royal house in December. The group has won the challenge a number of times and it is regarded as one of the best traditional dance groups in Moletjie.
Story and photos: ENDY SENYATSI
>>endy@observer.co.za
Pedi traditional dance group, Dinaka tsa Mauba entertains the crowd during.
Local motivational speaker and published author, Fredrick Mamabolo shares inspirational messages with the 2017 matrics.