As promised by the Rotary Club of Hae­nertsburg the annual big swim, Ebenezer Mile scheduled for 17 March this year aims at being yet another unforgettable event.
Though a new starting and finishing point was allocated for this year’s event, no-one has to compromise the amount of competition and fun the event offers yearly. The Ebenezer Mile will be hosted at Lepelle Northern Water’s social club, Old Smokey’s and not at the Mountain Yacht Club as previously. The new venue is located approximately 500 m past the yacht club. Signposts will be placed next to the road. This year’s race will once again offer a mile (1 600 m) and
3 000 m swim for junior and senior male and female swimmers.
The popularity of South Africa’s cleanest open water swim has this year lured interest from California in the United States of America. On the Rotary of Haenertsburg website Karen Sternberg, a long distance endurance swimmer from California confirmed her attendance this year.
“Back in 2014, I swam the Midmar Mile and was encouraged to swim your event (Ebenezer Mile) as part of a future visit. Several South African swimmers were very impressed with this race event and venue. In 2018, I truly wanted to participate so here I am! Thank you for allowing me to introduce myself and look forward to an exciting swim,” she wrote in her profile.
Sternberg was born in Upland, California and learned how to swim at the age of six. For several years she swam competitively in a pool. As she was growing up her family took summer trips to the Pacific Ocean and her father introduced her to ocean swimming. “It was an exhilarating experience to dive through the waves and swim along the coastline. I am not a particularly fast swimmer but I’ve maintained long distance endurance over the years. In retrospect, open water swimming has never been a major part of my physical fitness routine but I have the greatest respect for the sport and the discipline, strength and mental conditioning that it requires,” she said.
To enter visit www.rotaryhaenertsburg.co.za to find the link to the registration form. Entries will also be accepted on the day of the event.
Story: RC Myburgh
>>rc.observer@gmail.com