Limpopo registered an increase of 3,2% matric pass rate after acquiring 65,6% pass rate for the 2017 academic year with the Vhembe district remaining the top performing district in the province after accumulating 76,6%.
This pronouncement was made by Education MEC Ishmael Kgetjepe at The Ranch Resort when he officially announced the Limpopo National Senior Certificate (NSC) pass rate today (Friday) following the Basic Education minister, Angie Motshekga’s announcement yesterday (Thursday).
Vhembe district was represented by 19 993 learners and 15 322 passed. The second spot was claimed by Waterberg district with 69,4% after 4 214 candidates out of 6 068 passed while Mopani settled for the third position with 67,7% after 11 425 learners passed out of 16 870 who wrote examinations.
Kgetjepe revealed that 83 227 candidates wrote exams but only 54 625 learners passed. He said the province increased bachelor percentage passes from 18% in 2016 to 21% last year with 17 790 learners achieving bachelor passes. Some 20 011 candidates achieved diplomas, 16 809 higher certificates, 11 NSC qualification and four endorsed NSC qualification. He also announced the top three learners in the province who obtained a minimum of 60% in six subjects and a bachelor pass, excluding Life Orientation.
The first position went to Anza Tshipetane of Mbilwi Secondary School in the Vhembe district with a total marks of 1 718 while the second spot was occupied by Daniel Swarts from Hoërskool Pietersburg in the Capricorn district with 1 715 marks and the third position went to Boitumelo Ngoepe from Dendron Secondary School also from the Capricorn district with a total marks of 1 710.
“We congratulate our top three learners and we are delighted that five learners from Limpopo were invited to the 2017 national matric results announcement ceremony in recognition of their excellent performance. The candidates are top achievers in different categories determined by Motshekga and the province dominated the Minister’s Top Achievers Award category,” he explained.
Learners who put the province on the map are Thendo Kutama and Takalani Bambela who got position two and three in quintile two category respectively while Ngoepe got position two in the quintile one category. Tshipetane was named the top achiever in quintile four schools in the country while Bambela and Wonderful Nemalamangwa got position one and two for Mathematics and Physical Sciences respectively and were also recognised on the national stage.
The MEC Sepcial Award went to Thulani Shikwambana from Rivoni School for the Blind from the Vhembe district for achieving the highest marks in Xitsonga Home Language. The candidate competed with candidates from special schools and public ordinary schools and outcompeted all of them, Kgetjepe explained.
Kgetjepe was disappointed that Capricorn district as the hub of the province dropped further from its performance of 66,7% in 2015 to 60,9% in 2016 and again in 2017 registered a disappointing performance of 59,7% pass rate. He further stressed that more support should be provided to the district for the pass rate to increase.
Premier Stan Mathabatha warned during his address that poor performance displayed by the likes of Capricorn district cannot be accepted and added that for Limpopo to achieve its 80% pass rate target, good performance from bigger districts such as Capricorn and Vhembe in needed. He congratulated all learners who have made it and reiterated that those who can still repeat matric are urged to do so and those who qualify for supplementary examinations to seize the moment and prepare thoroughly for the exams.

Story & photos: Endy Senyatsi and Karen Venter

Limpopo second top learner Daniel Swarts from Hoërskool Pietersburg shares a moment with Premier Stan Mathabatha and Zion Christian Church (ZCC) leader, Bishop Barnabas Lekganyane as he receives his award.
Premier Stan Mathabatha and Zion Christian Church (ZCC) leader, Bishop Barnabas Lekganyane award Limpopo third best performing learner, Boitumelo Ngoepe from Dendron Secondary School.
Education MEC Ishmael Kgetjepe delivers his address during the pronouncement of the 2017 matric results pass rate at The Ranch Resort today (Friday).
The Speaker of the Legislature Polly Boshielo and Polokwane Mayor, Thembi Nkadimeng.
Premier Stan Mathabatha and Zion Christian Church (ZCC) leader, Bishop Barnabas Lekganyane.


