Retnev Motoring in Polokwane offers parents the perfect opportunity to buy a well looked after pre-owned small segment vehicle big enough for a busy student life but that is most importantly fuel efficient and reliable.
Tim Baber, Sales Manager at Retnev Motoring invited students and their parents to visit their showroom and view vehicles available for students. “When a parent or student buys a vehicle from us we would gladly give the student R5 000 cash back to enjoy as they like. A student should bring proof of enrolment at any university or tertiary institution to qualify for the promotion,” Baber said.
Retnev Motoring stocks a wide variety of cars and bakkies but for a student nothing would fit better than a Volkswagen Polo Vivo, a Ford Fiesta or Toyota Etios Cross.
Baber indicated that most stock has low mileage, a service plan or manufacturer warranty. Extended plans are also available.
Volkswagen Polo Vivo Conceptline
The 2016 models of which two are available are equipped with a 1,4 engine. The Polo Vivo boosts 55 kW of power and 132 Nm of torque which is more than enough to zip through busy city streets and to ensure a comfortable drive on the long road. With modern safety features like driver and passenger airbags, front and rear head restraints and a heated rear window for improved visibility, the Polo Vivo is reassuringly safe. Its steadfast German engineering gives you superior road holding and driveability, with Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) and alarm with remote control locking.
Ford Fiesta 1,0 EcoBoost
Fuel economy is not a phrase that usually gets the excitement factor going. But when it’s a student’s economy, it’s a different story. The Ford Fiesta helps save on fuel so you have more money for other things.
The 1,0 EcoBoost engine was recently announced International Engine of the Year for the third consecutive year because of its impressive fuel economy despite its excellent performance. The turbocharged 1,0-litre petrol engine delivers 92 kW of power and 170 Nm of torque and a thrifty 4,9 litre of fuel per 100 km. This 2016 models features an automatic gearbox which delivers the perfect combination between automatic convenience and manual efficiency.
The Fiesta is cool, modern and sleek, from its elongated headlights to the aerodynamic rear spoiler. It stands out in a crowd and comes with a wealth of features, including automatic headlights that sense when they need to turn on, as well as rain-sensing wipers that turn on and adjust their speed automatically for light or heavy rain.
Toyota Etios Cross
The 2016 Toyota Etios Cross is more than just great value for money; it’s the full package – a city-conqueror with a whole lot of get-up-and-go that will leave you smiling from ear to ear. Its bold athletic look is backed up by a lively 1,5 litre engine with enough power to tackle any quick mission and classic Etios fuel economy to top it all off. It also comes with all the interior features and more than enough space to put you in your comfort zone.
The Etios Cross is a handsome hatch, affordable with loads of handy features. It’s everything you could ever want in a vehicle, without breaking the bank. It offers 66 kW of power and 132 Nm of torque and is equipped with a five-speed manual gearbox. For information on the available details contact Retnev Motoring on 015 297 0795 or visit them on the corner of Schoeman and Rissik streets.
Story: RC Myburgh
>>rc.observer@gmail.com
The Volkswagen Polo Vivo is reliable and any student’s dream.