Baroka Football Club hopes to defeat heir nemesis, Polokwane City Football Club to cement their top eight spot in the Premier Soccer League (PSL) when the two meet in the Polokwane Derby set for Peter Mokaba Stadium on Saturday.
The two teams played to a goalless draw in their opening fixture of the League in August last year and they will be hoping for better results on Saturday.
City is currently languishing at the 14th position of the League with 22 points after 20 matches and a victory against Baroka could see them moving further in the League and ultimately surviving relegation. “We are more than ready for the encounter. We are aware of our position in the league and we have to win the match. I mean, if we win we will move from the 14th position to the 10th and that is a big move and it is achievable.” Polo­kwane City Football Club Spokesperson, Vusi Ntimane said.
He also mentioned that the team has recovered emotionally following the death of their defender Mogau Tshehla who died in a car accident last week. “The mood is better in the camp and we want to thank everyone for their support during that difficult period. We are dedicating all the last remaining 10 matches of the League to Mogau Tshehla.”
The rivalry fixture is the seventh installment of the unique and exciting PSL Woza Nazo series that has captivated local football since the start of the season last August.Woza Nazo, meaning ‘Bring it On’ is Absa’s brand campaign for 2017/18 Absa Premiership season which draws on the loyalty and passion that players and supporters have for the sport and for their teams.
Oscar Siziba, Managing Executive for Absa in the Northern Region was quoted to have said: “Absa will be rewarding fans and customers for their loyalty in the Absa brand and the game through unique and unforgettable experiences. Fans are encouraged to arrive at the Peter Mokaba Stadium early stand a chance to be a millionaire at the end of the Absa Premiership season through the Kick for a Million competition to take place at halftime,” added Siziba. Supporters will also be rewarded for their support and passion for the beautiful game through the unique Absa Red Ticket Zone experience inside the Peter Mokaba stadium on Saturday afternoon.
Story: Herbert Rachuene
>>herbert.observer@gmail.com
Polokwane City Football Team before their match against Orlando Pirates at Peter Mokaba Stadium last year.