In their quest to excel in the upcoming Brutal Fruit Netball League (BFNPL), Limpopo Baobabs recently appointed former Jaguars and Mpumalanga Sunbirds Coach, Jenne-lee Delport as their new head coach.
Delport, director of netball and Life Orientation educator at Hoërskool Dr. E.G. Jansen in Brakpan played a crucial role as assistant coach in the Jaquars’ league victory last season.
She succeeds Dumisani Chauke under whose instruction the Baobabs finished eighth in the league last season. “I am very happy to join the team. When the President of Netball South Africa, Cecilia Molokwane approached me to take over the Limpopo team I did not hesitate. I am looking forward to helping the team improve on their rankings. Our aim this year is to finish in the top six or win the league,” Delport said during the team’ send-off last Wednesday.
Molokwane believes that Delport’s experience will help the provincial team in the league. “She did well during her tenure at Jaguars and I believe that her experience will help the team.
“We want high performing coaches for all our league teams because this is our flagship programme. We are wishing all the teams well and we are saying let the best team win.”
The league is expected to commence in all earnest tomorrow (Friday) at the Ellis Park Indoor Arena in Gauteng. The Baobabs will play their opening match of the league against the North West Flames on Sunday at the same venue.
Also speaking during the send-off was Sport, Arts and Culture MEC Onicca Moloi who wished the team well in their league fixtures. “We believe in the selected players and technical team and we are adamant that they will do well in the league. We expect them to reach the finals because we believe they can,” she said.
Team captain, Theona Mthombeni said their aim this season was to do well and make the people of Limpopo proud. “We have been working hard during our training and we have prepared well. We are very positive. We will give our all and make sure that we win all our matches in order to reach the finals,” Mthombeni said.
The Brutal Fruit Netball Cup is a South African semi-professional netball league. The championship is contested by 10 teams from nine provinces over a five-week period.
Story and photos: Herbert Rachuene
>>herbert.observer@gmail.com
Jenne-lee Delport, newly appointed head coach of the Limpopo Baobabs.
Cecilia Molekwane, President of Netball South Africa.