New rules introduced by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), perceived by many to have the intention of isolating international middle distance star Caster Semenya, have prompted Sport, Arts and Culture MEC Onicca Moloi to urge the South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (Sascoc) to immediately challenge these rules in the Court of Arbitration for Sport seated in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The IAAF issued new eligibility regulations for the classification of female athletes with differences of sexual development last Thursday. These  new  regulations, which are to come  into  effect  as  from  1 November  2018,  replace  the  previous  regulations  governing  eligibility  of  females  with hyperandrogenism to compete in women’s competition, which no longer apply anywhere in the sport.
According to a statement from IAAF, as the Court of Arbitration for Sport (‘CAS’) Panel recognised in Chand v IAAF & AFI(CAS 2014/A/3759), men have significant advantages in size, strength and power over women, due in large part to men’s higher levels of circulating testosterone from puberty onwards.
“Because of the impact that such advantages can have on sporting performance, it is generally accepted that competition between male and female athletes would not be fair and meaningful, and would risk discouraging women from participation in the sport. Therefore, in common with many other sports, the IAAF has created separate competition categories (‘classifications’) for male and female athletes.”
Moloi views the IAAF’s new Eligibility Regulations for Female Classification as having been inspired by the hatred toward Semenya for her unmatched sporting prowess. “From 2009 when Semenya won her first world championship, the IAAF made continued efforts to bring our golden girl down,” Moloi said.
The MEC stressed that the Provincial Government will continue to take Semenya’s side throughout her never-ending abuse by the IAAF. “She remains the epitome of excellence and a role model to young girls from disadvantaged backgrounds who aspire to become sport people.”
She added that they are aware that Sascoc was equally unhappy with what has been dubbed ‘Anti Caster Semenya Regulations’. “Therefore, they should immediately challenge these lousy regulations with the Court of Arbitration for Sport, because clearly the IAAF is a megalomaniac bully that will stop at nothing to humiliate our golden girl.”
Attempts to get hold of Semenya for her comment were futile.
Story: Herbert Rachuene
>>herbert.observer@gmail.com
Caster Semenya.