Amateur karatekas from clubs countrywide came together in Polokwane on Saturday to participate in the Limpopo All Styles Challenge held in honour of karate stalwart Armien Jardien who passed away in February after a long illness.
Jardien, a longstanding member of the Traditional Styles Known Knowledge in Action (Tskkia) Yin-Yang Martial Arts and Self-defence Club in Polokwane, played a pivotal role in the development of the code in the province.
Fazlin Jardien, Tskkia Yin-Yang Martial Arts and Self-defence Club co-founder in Polokwane and organiser of the event thanked all the teams from the various provinces for their participation and for supporting the event. “It was a roaring success with over 125 competitors vying for first position but there was only one winner in each category,” Fazlin said.
She also mentioned that their team comprising 27 competitors won a total of 57 medals of which 27 were gold, 16 silver and 14 bronze. “It was an encouraging feat for our team and we want to see them doing well in other competitions,” concluded Jardien.
The overall junior winner was Muskan Umata and the senior kumite award went to Mation Kwangwara. The Best senior kata award went to Celeste Green and Yusha Khan Patel won the best junior kata.
The team spirit awards went to Limpopo Province Sport Karate-Kickboxing Academy, Tskkia team from Rustenburg and team Tskkia Yin-Yang in Polokwane.
The spirit awards went to the teams with the best discipline, self control and for displaying good sportsmanship throughout the tournament.
Story and photos: Herbert Rachuene
>>herbert.observer@gmail.com
Nivanka Standton executes kata defence moves using a sword.
Tsskia Yin-Yang Martial Arts and Self-defence Club member Celeste Green is all concentration while demonstrating the use of the sword for self-defence in kata.
Umaima Ali Sayed, Arsala Ally, Sohail Shaikh, Aahid Ally during their Shotokan demonstration.
Shotokan participants Zoya Patel, Aqeeal Jardien, Alisha Patel ready to impress the crowd and judges.
Club founders Annatjie de Jager (Yin-Yang Martial Arts and Self-defence Club) Albert Venter, (Shotakan karate, Rustenburg) and Fazlin Jardien, co-founder of Tsskia Yin-Yang Martial Arts and Self-defence Club.